---
title: Alien vs Predator
date: 2023-06-27
publishdate: 2022-06-30
draft: true
---

I've done my share of streaming. Most of it involved Kafka (as a source, as a sink or both). But not only (processing MySQL changelog directly). 

Usually for me stream processing means using Kafka as a datasource. The result goes back to Kafka or something else.

Kafka provides several APIs (or one API with several layers of abstraction) to consume data from it. IMHO best experience comes from using those APIs in truly reactive frameworks (i.e. Vertx).

~~Different stream processing frameworks have been built on top of it.~~ Different stream processing frameworks can use Kafka as a datasource. Naming them doesn't make sense: something new comes up every day. Take into account that I use the term _stream processing framework_ quite liberally. I consider [Materialize](https://materialize.com/) one of them. 

Kafka stack includes its own _general purpose stream processing framework_: **Kafka Streams**. Main incumbent considered **Apache Flink**.

Some months ago Confluent [acquired](https://www.confluent.io/press-release/confluent-plans-immerok-acquisition-to-accelerate-cloud-native-apache-flink/) Immerok, one of the solutions in the _"cloud-native, fully managed Flink service"_ space. Confluent plans to offer Flink as another stream processing solution into its cloud offering using Immerok technology and expertise. Right now KSQL is the alternative (as a managed solution using Confluent cloud).

That decision sparked again **byzantine** discussions comparing Kafka Streams and Flink. 

Comparatives (between Kafka Streams and Apache Flink) usually stay on the surface (Flink is better because same topology can do batch processing and can do stream processing). I'll try **to capture here main differences between them as a helpful resource to anyone using one of them and considering using the other one**.

### Parallelism ###

In Kafka Streams the only way to increase **parallelism** is through **input topics' partitioning** (if you can't change topology's input topics you can use a repartition topic with more partitions). In Kafka Streams **more parallelism means more partitions**.  

In Flink parallelism is not tied to topics' partitioning.

Partitions is a scarce resource in Kafka. Usually is the limiting factor in any Kafka cluster.

### Rebalances ###

Rebalance is the Kafka streams automatic mechanism to handle consumer changes. In a healthy Kafka Streams application rebalances should go unnoticed. Rebalances themselves are not the problem. Just a symptom. 

But sometimes debugging those symptoms can be tricky. 

The way Flink works makes rebalances unnecesary.

### State ###

Both Kafka Streams and Flink uses Rocksdb for storing state. I'm cutting a long story short. Stores are modular and both of them provide different implementations but IMHO Rocksdb is the way to go.

They differ in long term persistence strategy. Kafka Streams uses the kafka broker (a changelog topic). Flink uses disk. Restoring state in Flink means copying rocksdb files from persistent shared disk to local storage (taskmanager). Restoring state in Kafka Streams means consuming entries from changelog topic. 

Changing parallelism in a stateful deployed Kafka Streams app is tricky: there isn't an automatic way to reshuffle your changelog topics from n partitions to m partitions. 

Changing state paralellism in Flink is automatic.

### Kafka ###

Kafka Streams design makes impossible to handle more than one Kafka cluster (you can't consume from a Kafka cluster and produce to a different one or even consume from different Kafka clusters) per topology. In Kafka Streams 1 app means 1 Kafka cluster. 

Imagine an use case where your input data is scattered along different Kafka cluster and output data should be placed in another one. Using Kafka Streams, first you have to move all input data to one cluster, produce output data to the same cluster and afterwards move output data to the other Kafka cluster.

In Flink you can consume at the same time from different Kafka clusters and produce to another one.

### SQL ###

Many streaming processing frameworks have a SQL interface. Kafka Streams has KSQL and Flink has Flink SQL. 

Flink SQL is a lot more powerful than KSQL. More important Flink SQL is interoperable with Flink (DataStream API) allowing you to express part of your topology using more basic APIs and part of it using SQL directly. You can't do that with Kafka Streams.

-----

Kafka Streams design is heavily influenced by Flink. Wether you know Flink and switch to Kafka Streams or the other way round, you'll find similarities in many different aspects (stream dsl, state stores, etc...). Kafka Streams came up after Flink and sometimes it looks like its light version (whatever you can do with Kafka Streams, you can do it with Flink but not the other way round).
